---
title: Regenerative Finance (ReFi) Explained
description: A practical explanation of this new approach to finance
category: Learn
image: "https://cdn.pixabay.com/photo/2020/04/06/13/12/leaf-5009630_1280.jpg"
date: "August 18th, 2023"
author: "CARBON Copy Team"

---

For all its benefits, our current financial system as one fatal flaw: the prioritisation of profit over everything else, including the environment.

It has led to the grinding inequality, environmental degradation, and climate change that threaten our very existence as a species. That isn’t hyperbole. If we continue down our current path, the next century will present existential risks that we are simply not prepared for. Islands will be swallowed whole, urban air will be too toxic to breath, and water will become the most valuable resource.

It sounds bleak because it is. The thing about capitalism, though, is that it doesn’t have to entail such a ruthless pursuit of profit. There is a path in which profit, humanity, and the environment can co-exist; a path in which we are incentivised to ensure that all three benefit from our financial and investment decision-making.

That path is regenerative finance, or ReFi.

Emanating from the concept of [regenerative economics](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Regenerative_economic_theory), ReFi is an approach to finance and investment that aims to support the regeneration of ecological, social, and economic systems. It recognises that the traditional financial system has often prioritised short-term profits at the expense of long-term sustainability and resilience.

It is a shift in thinking that aims to align financial goals with broader societal goals. Things like sustainability, social justice, and community empowerment are factored into financial decision-making and investment strategies.

<h2 class="mb-3 mt-4">Core principles</h2>

- Financial decisions have broader implications **beyond financial returns**.
- **Investment impact** should be evaluated over extended time horizons.
- Practices that **restore natural resources**, **promote biodiversity**, and **enhance social well-being** should be supported.
- Capital should be allocated towards enterprises and projects that **address societal challenges**, such as renewable energy, sustainable agriculture, and affordable housing.
- **Individuals and communities** should be empowered by providing them with access to financial resources and opportunities.

<h2 class="mb-3 mt-4">Web3 foundation</h2>

An assumption can be made that our current financial infrastructure and psychology can't reconcile with the concept of regenerative economics. There has to be both a shift in mindset away from exploitation for profit and radical changes in the standard of transparency expected from companies and governments.

ReFi, therefore, has been built on top of Web3 infrastructure and with Web3 philosophy in mind. Technologies like blockchain, cryptocurrencies, and smart contracts are being employed to ensure transparency and decentralization, equitable value transfer, and automation. The community-centric philosophy at the core of Web3 is attracting a new generation of leaders and decision-makers that believe ReFi is the right path forward.

It's also worth noting that Web3 infrastructure is publicly accessible - a public good in and of itself. This has allowed builders to start project development without having to each build their own transparent and decentralized infrastructure. It also means that literally anyone with a computer and internet access could start building ReFi apps that benefit their local communities.

<h2 class="mb-3 mt-4">Practical applications</h2>

Importantly, ReFi isn't *only* about reducing carbon emissions or combatting climate change. While these may be the first and most obvious use cases, they don't do justice to ReFi's potential scope.

- **Universal basic income** - With the advent of generative AI, it may only be a matter of time before universal basic income (UBI) is a reality. ReFi is designed to enable UBI solutions through the use of blockchain, cryptocurrencies, and smart contracts. Combined with Web3-based digital identity, it would be very difficult to cheat the system.

- **Reforestation** - Regenerating degraded lands is seen is critical to sustainability across the globe. ReFi helps flip the incentive model so that planting new trees is more economically viable than exploiting the land for other uses.

- **Cultural preservation** - Languages, art, and other cultural artifacts are frequently being lost. ReFi leverages things like non-fungible tokens (NFTs) to enable communities to benefit financially from cultural preservation.

- **Decentralised carbon trading** - Voluntary carbon markets are opaque and inefficient at best. ReFi enables the creation of transparent carbon markets where carbon credits can be considered a new asset class.

- **No-loss gambling** - Gambling is a major source of addiction and can lead to erratic behaviour. No-loss gambling is an example of ReFi in which players can win but they never lose their original deposit. (See [PoolTogether](https://decrypt.co/resources/what-is-pooltogether-the-no-loss-crypto-lottery-explained))

<h2 class="mb-3 mt-4">What's next for ReFi</h2>

As ReFi is still relatively new as a concept, it has a ways to go from both public acceptance and project development standpoints. It may be that carbon credits are the first major use case that ushers in a wave of ReFi products, but it could just as soon be a universal basic income solution or no-loss gambling that drives mainstream adoption.

What we do know is that the regulation of cryptocurrencies and other blockchain-based digital assets like NFTs is going to play an important role in both investor willingness to fund ReFi projects and founder willingness to start ReFi projects.

Until then, those in the ReFi space will continue innovating, experimenting, and forging a new path to a more sustainable world.
