---
title: Can ReFi help prevent future writer strikes?
description: It better, because AI-written content is not ready for primetime.
category: Editorial
image: "https://cdn.pixabay.com/photo/2018/10/18/18/59/movie-scenes-3757174_1280.jpg"
date: "August 15th, 2023"
author: "CARBON Copy Editor"
---

As the Writers Guild of America (WGA) continues its labour dispute with the Alliance of Motion Picture and Television Producers (AMPTP), Regenerative finance (ReFi) and its underlying philosophy provides clues as to how we might prevent future disputes from interrupting our beloved pastime.   

If the strike has taught us anything, it's that writers, along with most everyone else involved in the creation of movies and television series, are seen by production studios as a resource to be extracted. The logic of our economic system, once applied, compels these studios to keep extraction costs to a minimum as a way of maximising profits. When that gap becomes large enough, when the perceived inequity becomes so egregious, the only viable means to claw back some of the lost value is strike action.

While this ebb and flow may seem like a healthy process, it paints a rather bleak picture of our economic system. To illustrate, we have  a large, ever-increasing pie with an ever-increasing number of mouths to feed. The people in control of the pie server (the studios and streaming companies), however, are playing a zero-sum game. They want as much of the pie for themselves as they can get, without worrying about how much is left for everyone else.

<figure class="text-center my-5">
  <blockquote class="blockquote">
    <span>The answer to all your questions is money.</span>
  </blockquote>
  <figcaption class="blockquote-footer">
    <cite title="Don Ohlmeyer">Don Ohlmeyer, late NBC executive</cite>
  </figcaption>
</figure>

Regenerative economics, in contrast, looks at the pie and says, "How can we not only ensure that there is enough for everyone today, but also that the pie keeps getting bigger day after day?" It's the idea that we're all better off if we get our fair share *and* contribute to increasing everyone's share. If people act out of their own self-interest, eventually there won't be enough to go around. Dictators rarely survive a shrinking pie. Neither will the studios.

It's the kind of problem ReFi seems destined to address with a equitable and sustainable solution to the allocation of value.


<h2 class="mb-3 mt-4">But first, why are they striking?</h2>

It was Don Ohlmeyer who sagely pointed out that the answer to all of our questions could be traced back to the single-most important asset in our current economic system: money. The WGA strike is no exception. Money is at the heart of the three primary issues:

<h4><i class="bi bi-coin"></i> Residuals from streaming revenue</h4>

The key point here is that writers for broadcast television series earn significantly more than writers for streaming series. It has to do with the collective bargaining agreement signed in May 2020 which stipulated that the minimum wage would only apply to writers of broadcast television. Writers for streaming series had to negotiate with the streaming companies directly.  

<h4><i class="bi bi-coin"></i> Artificial intelligence (AI)</h4>

ChatGPT and the like have shown us what generative AI is capable of, so it isn't a stretch of the imagination to envision AI writing movies and TV series one day. For the studios, this eventuality couldn't come soon enough. AI-driven writing means lower costs, which means more profit. For the writers, however, it's a terrifying prospect. Best to hold it off as long as possible.

<h4><i class="bi bi-coin"></i> Employment rights</h4>

The WGA wants assurances that a minimum number of writers will be employed for a minimum amount of time regardless of whether they are being utilised. It also wants its members to get pension and healthcare contributions. Not outrageous asks by any criteria, but clearly more than the AMPTP are willing to concede.

<h2 class="mb-3 mt-4">A question of value</h2>

We can all agree that society is better off with movies and TV series.

<h2 class="mb-3 mt-4">Preventing future strikes with ReFi</h2>

How does

::editorial
